>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 25:
MOVING FORWARD-- THE DEMOCRATIC
PARTY ELECTS A NEW NATIONAL
CHAIRMAN; AND IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, WILL BRITAIN'S EXIT
FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION AFFECT
THE TENUOUS PEACE IN NORTHERN
IRELAND?
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY HAS A NEW
LEADER.
AT ITS WINTER MEETING IN ATLANTA
TODAY, THE DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL
COMMITTEE ELECTED TOM PEREZ AS
ITS CHAIRMAN.
55-YEAR-OLD PEREZ HAS SERVED IN
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION AS
LABOR SECRETARY AND AS HEAD OF
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT'S CIVIL
RIGHTS DIVISION.
HE'S A BUFFALO, NEW YORK-BORN
SON OF IMMIGRANTS FROM THE
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, A GRADUATE
OF BROWN UNIVERSITY AND HARVARD
LAW SCHOOL, A FORMER FEDERAL
PROSECUTOR, AND ONE-TIME AIDE TO
THE LATE SENATOR, EDWARD
KENNEDY.
THE RUNNER-UP WAS MINNESOTA
CONGRESSMAN KEITH ELLISON, WHO
IS SERVING HIS SIXTH TERM IN THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, AND
PEREZ IMMEDIATELY APPOINTED HIM
DEPUTY CHAIRMAN.
THE PARTY CURRENTLY HOLDS ONLY
17 OF THE 50 GOVERNORSHIPS, AND
193 SEATS IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES, ONE OF ITS
LOWEST NUMBERS IN 70 YEARS.
PEREZ SAID THE PARTY NEEDS TO
REVERSE ITS "CRISIS OF
CONFIDENCE" AFTER LOSING NEARLY
1,000 SEATS IN STATE
LEGISLATURES IN THE PAST DECADE,
AND THE WHITE HOUSE LAST YEAR.
>> WE NEED A CHAIR WHO CANNOT
ONLY TAKE THE FIGHT TO DONALD
TRUMP, BUT MAKE SURE THAT WE
TALK ABOUT OUR POSITIVE MESSAGE
OF INCLUSION AND OPPORTUNITY AND
TALK TO THAT BIG TENT OF THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
>> Sreenivasan: NPR POLITICAL
EDITOR DOMENICO MONTANARO IS
COVERING THE D.N.C. GATHERING IN
ATLANTA AND JOINS ME FROM THERE
TO DISCUSS THE RESULTS AND THE
PARTY'S STATE.
DOMENICO, THIS WAS A CLOSE VOTE,
WENT TO A SECOND BALLOT.
THIS IS KIND OF AN EXAMPLE OF
THE TENSION INSIDE THE PARTY.
>> NO QUESTION ABOUT IT.
I MEAN, THAT SPLIT BETWEEN THE
PROGRESSIVE WING AND THAT MORE
ESTABLISHMENT GOVERNING WING WAS
ON FULL DISPLAY BECAUSE YOU
WOUND UP WITH OBAMA'S FORMER
LABOR SECRETARY, TOM PEREZ,
SQUEEKING OUT A WIN OVER
MINNESOTA CONGRESSMAN KEITH
ELLISON WITH 235 VOTES OUT OF
THE 400-PLUS THAT-- OF ALL THE
VOTING MEMBERS.
HE NEEDED 218 TO CROSS THE
THRESHOLD TO WIN.
BUT ON THAT FIRST ROUND OF
BALLOTING, PEREZ WAS ONE SHORT
AND ELLISON WAS AT 200.
AND IT TOOK HIM TO THAT SECOND
ROUND.
THE FOUR OTHER CANDIDATES ENDED
UP DROPPING OUT AND HE WOUND
UP BEING ABLE TO GET PAST THAT
THRESHOLD.
BUT NO QUESTION ABOUT IT.
WHEN PEREZ WAS NAMED THE WINNER,
I WAS STANDING IN FRONT OF A
HUGE CROWD OF ELLISON SUPPORTERS
WHO CONTINUED TO KEEP CHANTING,
"MONEY OUT OF POLITICS," AND
DIDN'T WANT TO HEAR ANYTHING
FROM PEREZ.
PEREZ MADE A VERY DEFT MOVE BY
NAMING ELLISON HIS DEPUTY AND
THAT SEEMED TO QUIET THE CROWD.
>> Sreenivasan: THESE TENSIONS
DON'T DISSIPATE IMMEDIATELY.
>> NO, THEY DON'T GO AWAY
IMMEDIATELY.
I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS PEOPLE
WIND UP DOING-- IT'S KIND OF FUN
TO ME TO SEE PEOPLE PUT THIS
MUCH STOCK INTO A PARTY
CHAIRMAN.
LIKE, THEY'RE NOT THE PERSON
RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT.
THEY'RE NOT THE PERSON WHO, YOU
KNOW, IS GOING TO WAVE A MAGIC
WAND AND CHANGE THE FACT THAT
DEMOCRATS ARE OUT OF POWER IN
STATE LEGISLATURES, IN
GOVERNORSHIPS, IN CONGRESS.
YOU KNOW, AT THEIR LOWEST POINT
OF POWER IN MORE THAN 100 YEARS,
REALLY.
SO THIS IS SOMEBODY WHO IS AN
ORGANIZATIONAL FIGURE, SOMEONE
WHO IS SUPPOSED TO BE ABLE TO
RAISE MONEY, AND THAT'S NOT
SOMETHING DEMOCRATS-- THIS GROUP
OF DEMOCRATS WANTS TO
NECESSARILY BE TALKING ABOUT.
THEY WANT TO TALK ABOUT HOW THEY
STOP DONALD TRUMP AND THAT'S A
LOT HARDER TO DO FOR A PARTY
CHAIRMAN.
IT WAS INTERESTING FOR ME TO
WATCH THAT, ESPECIALLY IN
COMPARISON WITH REPUBLICANS WERE
IN 2009.
THEY DID SOMETHING VERY SIMILAR
WHEN THEY HAD MICHAEL STEELE
WINNING, WHEN THE PARTY DIDN'T
WANT TO BE ALIGNED WITH DAWSON
AND APPEARED TO BE SIDING WITH A
WHITE SOUTHERN REPUBLICAN WHEN
YOU HAD THE FIRST BLACK
PRESIDENT.
SO SOME OF THOSE SAME SPLITS
START TO EMERGE HERE ON THE
DEMOCRATIC SIDE WITH THEM OUT OF
POWER.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU KNOW, BOTH
KEITH ELLISON AND TOM PEREZ SAID
AT SOME POINTS DURING THIS
CONTEST, IT'S NOT JUST THAT WE
LOST THE ELECTION IN
NOVEMBER.
IT'S JUST THAT WE LOST 1,000
ELECTIONS TO GET US TO THIS
POINT.
>> LOOK, THAT HAS BEEN THE
BIGGEST PROBLEM FOR DEMOCRATS
OVER THE PAST DECADE, REALLY
KIND OF IGNORING SOME OF THOSE
LOW-LEVEL, DOWN-BALLOT RACES AND
THINKING THAT DEMOGRAPHY WAS
SUCH DESTINY THAT THEY WOULD
ALWAYS WIN THE PRESIDENCY.
AND I HAD NOTED BEFORE THE
ELECTION THAT IF DEMOCRATS
WERE TO LOSE, IT WOULD BE A
POTENTIAL REAL PROBLEM FOR THEM,
AS FAR AS HILLARY CLINTON LOSING
THE PRESIDENCY, BECAUSE THEY ARE
SO FAR OUT OF POWER WHEN IT
COMES TO THOSE STATES AND
IT COMES TO GOVERNORS RACES.
THE PARTY IS GOING TO HAVE TO
START TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO GET
MONEY INTO THE PARTY TO BUILD UP
SOME OF THE LOCAL PARTIES THAT
REALLY NEED THOSE WINS, THOSE
GRANULAR-LEVEL WINS AND
ORGANIZING, FOR AS LOW AS SCHOOL
BOARD, FRANKLY, IF THEY WANT TO
BE ABLE TO RISE UP.
>> Sreenivasan: NPR'S DOMENICO
MONTANARO JOINING US FROM
ATLANTA.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AMERICAN-BACKED
IRAQI ARMY TROOPS ARE PUSHING
FARTHER INTO WESTERN MOSUL TWO
DAYS AFTER CAPTURING THE AIRPORT
FROM ENTRENCHED ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS.
IRAQI OFFICERS SAY ISIS IS
PUTTING UP TOUGH RESISTANCE WITH
CAR BOMBS, SNIPERS, AND ARMED
DRONES.
THE ARMY CAPTURED EASTERN MOSUL
LAST MONTH AND BEGAN ITS
OFFENSIVE TO RETAKE THE
COUNTRY'S SECOND LARGEST CITY
LAST OCTOBER.
TODAY'S FIGHTING PROMPTED A
THOUSAND PEOPLE TO EVACUATE
THEIR HOMES.
THE UNITED NATIONS SAYS 400,000
CIVILIANS MAY FLEE MOSUL AS FOOD
AND FUEL SUPPLIES RUN OUT.
IN SYRIA, GOVERNMENT AIR FORCE
STRIKES AND JIHADIST SUICIDE
BOMBINGS ARE DISRUPTING THE
LATEST U.N. BROKERED PEACE
TALKS.
TODAY, IN THE MOSTLY GOVERNMENT-
CONTROLLED CITY OF HOMS, SYRIA'S
THIRD LARGEST CITY, SUICIDE
BOMBERS STRUCK TWO SECURITY
OFFICES, KILLING AT LEAST
32 PEOPLE, INCLUDING THE
GENERAL WHO HEADED MILITARY
INTELLIGENCE.
A GROUP LINKED TO AL QAEDA
CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
ATTACKS.
THE SYRIAN AIR FORCE RESPONDED
WITH AIRSTRIKES AGAINST A REBEL-
HELD ENCLAVE IN HOMS.
ON THURSDAY IN GENEVA, THE U.N.
OPENED ITS FIRST ROUND OF PEACE
TALKS IN TEN MONTHS WITH
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SIDES IN
SYRIA'S SIX-YEAR-OLD CIVIL WAR.
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
SAYS A TWO-STATE SOLUTION IS THE
ONLY REALISTIC WAY TO END THE
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICT.
MERKEL MADE THE COMMENT IN HER
WEEKLY VIDEO MESSAGE AND SAID
SHE'LL DISCUSS THE SUBJECT IN
HER VISIT WITH EGYPT'S PRESIDENT
NEXT WEEK.
TODAY, AT A CAMPAIGN EVENT FOR
THE FOURTH TERM SHE'S SEEKING,
MERKEL TOLD SUPPORTERS GERMANY
MUST INCREASE MILITARY SPENDING
TO 2% OF GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT,
TO FULFILL NATO'S REQUIREMENT OF
ALL MEMBER NATIONS.
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL" AND
"WASHINGTON POST" ARE REPORTING
BACK CHANNEL TALKS BETWEEN THE
U.S. AND NORTH KOREA, PLANNED IN
NEW YORK NEXT WEEK, HAVE BEEN
CANCELED.
THE NEWSPAPERS SAY THE STATE
DEPARTMENT WITHDREW A VISA FOR A
TOP NORTH KOREAN ENVOY
YESTERDAY.
THIS AFTER NORTH KOREA RECENTLY
TEST-FIRED A MISSILE, AND THE
ASSASSINATION OF THE NORTH
KOREAN LEADER'S HALF BROTHER.
HE WAS KILLED WITH V.X. NERVE
AGENT AT A MALAYSIAN AIRPORT.
THE MEETING WITH FORMER AMERICAN
DIPLOMATS WOULD HAVE BEEN THE
FIRST OF ITS KIND ON U.S. SOIL
IN SIX YEARS.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY MARKED THE
END OF THE ANNUAL CONSERVATIVE
POLITICAL ACTION CONFERENCE,
KNOWN AS CPAC, OUTSIDE
WASHINGTON.
CPAC SAW A WHO'S WHO OF
REPUBLICANS, FROM PRESIDENT
TRUMP TOUTING HIS CONSERVATIVE
CREDENTIALS, TO HIS ADVISER
STEVE BANNON, WHO TALKED ABOUT
"DECONSTRUCTING THE
ADMINISTRATIVE STATE."
FOR MORE ON CPAC, I AM JOINED BY
REUTERS POLITICAL REPORTER ANDY
SULLIVAN.
SO, ANDY, LAST YEAR, THEY
WERE BOOING THEN-CANDIDATE
TRUMP.
THE RECEPTION THIS YEAR WAS MUCH
BETTER.
>> YEAH, I THINK IT'S SAFE TO
SAY IT WAS RAPTUROUS THIS YEAR.
HE GOT SEVERAL STANDING
OVATIONS, PLENTY OF THOSE RED
"MAKE AMERICA GREAT" HATS ON.
AND TO BE FAIR, I THINK
CONSERVATIVES HAVE A LOT TO
CHEER ABOUT IN THE FIRST MONTH
OR SO OF TRUMP'S PRESIDENCY.
WHILE THE CONVERSATION WE HAVE
BEEN WRITING ABOUT AND OTHER
NEWS OUTLETS HAVE BEEN WRITING
ABOUT IS HIS TIES TO RUSSIA,
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, THAT SORT
OF THING, CONSERVATIVES POINT TO
THE THINGS THAT HE'S DONE.
HE'S NOMINATED A CONSERVATIVE
SUPREME COURT JUSTICE IN NEAL
GORSUCH, A LOT OF THE PEOPLE ON
HIS CABINET ARE CONSERVATIVES AS
WELL, RESTRICTING IMMIGRATION,
ROLLING BACK REGULATIONS.
THAT'S ALL STUFF HE'S CAMPAIGNED
ON.
THAT'S ALL STUFF THEY SAY HE
DELIVERED.
THEY'RE PRETTY HAPPY SO FAR.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THE
AUDIENCE THAT ASSEMBLED FOR
THIS CONFERENCE, IS THAT
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE LARGER
CONSERVATIVE BASE IN AMERICA?
>> NO, I THINK IT'S SAFE TO SAY
THAT CPAC DRAWS A YOUNGER
CROWD, TENDS TO DRAW A CROWD
THAT'S A LITTLE MORE EDGY, A
LITTLE MORE TOWARDS THE FRINGE.
IF YOU RECALL, RAND PAUL HAS
ALWAYS BEEN POPULAR THERE, AS
WELL AS HIS FATHER, RON PAUL,
LEADERS OF THE LIBERTARIAN WING
OF THE REPUBLICAN PARTY.
TED CRUZ WAS ALSO VERY POPULAR
THERE.
HE WON THE STRAW POLL LAST YEAR.
TRUMP ISN'T REALLY A TRADITIONAL
CONSERVATIVE.
YOU WOULD THINK THERE WOULD BE A
LOT OF CONFLICTS THERE, THAT
SOME OF THESE PEOPLE WOULDN'T
LIKE WHAT HE'S DOING-- FOR
EXAMPLE, CONSERVATIVES
TRADITIONALLY FAVOR FREE TRADE.
TRUMP IS DEFINITELY MUCH MORE OF
A PROTECTIONIST.
PEOPLE DON'T SEEM THAT HUNG UP
ON THAT.
PEOPLE I TALK TO SAY "THAT'S
OKAY.
WE'LL SORT THAT STUFF OUT.
WE'RE LOOKING TOWARDS THE BIG
VICTORIES AND THE FACT WE HAVE A
REPUBLICAN IN THE WHITE HOUSE
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN EIGHT
YEARS."
>> Sreenivasan: IT WAS ALSO A
RARE PUBLIC APPEARANCE BY HIS
ADVISER, STEVE BANNON.
>> RIGHT.
BANNON AND CHIEF OF STAFF REINCE
PRIEBUS GAVE THIS SORT OF
"BUDDY SPEECH," THIS SORT OF ODD
COUPLE APPROACH WHERE THEY
TALKED ABOUT DESPITE THEY'RE
PORTRAYED RIVALS, THEY'RE
WORKING VERY HARD TO DELIVER ON
TRUMP'S CAMPAIGN PROMISES.
THEY'RE ALSO SAYING, "LOOK, YOU
GUYS NEED TO HAVE OUR BACKS AND
NEED TO HOLD US ACCOUNTABLE TO
DELIVER ON TRUMP'S CAMPAIGN
PROMISES IN THE MONTHS AND YEARS
TO COME."
AND I THINK THAT'S A REAL KEY
POINT.
IT WILL BE INTERESTING TO SEE
CPAC NEXT YEAR.
TRUMP SAYS HE'LL RETURN.
A YEAR FROM NOW, WE WILL SEE
WHETHER THEY HAVE ACCOMPLISHED
THINGS LIKE TAX REFORM AND
REPEALING AND REPLACING THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT, THOSE
BIG-TICKET ITEMS THAT THEY
PROMISED TO DO.
>> Sreenivasan: AND YOU ALSO
SAW A RELATIVELY CONSISTENT
MESSAGE OF THE MEDIA BEING THE
OPPOSITION, SOMETHING THAT THE
PRESIDENT HAS BEEN TWEETING AND
SEVERAL OF HIS ADVISERS HAVE
BEEN SAYING.
>> RIGHT.
AND THAT'S A BIG UNIFYING
MESSAGE FOR THE FOLKS IN THE
ROOM.
YOU KNOW, AGAIN, IT'S NOT
REFLECTIVE OF THE BROADER
CONSERVATIVE MOVEMENT AS A WHOLE
NECESSARILY.
THERE'S A LOT OF DISCUSSION
ABOUT THINGS LIKE FREE SPEECH ON
CAMPUS, WHICH THE YOUNGER
MEMBERS ARE ENCOUNTERING.
AND, SURE, WHEN YOU ATTACK THE
MEDIA, THAT'S SOMETHING
EVERYBODY ON THE RIGHT CAN GET
BEHIND.
THEY FEEL LIKE THEIR VIEWS
AREN'T ACCURATELY REFLECTED.
THERE'S THIS DISJUNCTION THAT I
NOTED EARLIER WHERE REPORTERS
AND A LOT OF MAINSTREAM OUTLETS
ARE FOCUSING ON THINGS LIKE
TRUMP'S TIES TO RUSSIA.
THAT'S NOT SO MUCH OF A CONCERN
FOR PEOPLE ON THE RIGHT.
>> Sreenivasan: REUTERS
POLITICAL REPORTER ANDY
SULLIVAN, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT MONTH,
BRITISH PRIME MINISTER
THERESA MAY IS EXPECTED TO
BEGIN THE PROCESS OF HAVING THE
UNITED KINGDOM FORMALLY EXIT THE
28-NATION EUROPEAN UNION.
THE U.K. IS MADE UP OF ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND, WALES, AND NORTHERN
IRELAND, AND WHILE A MAJORITY OF
U.K. VOTERS IN LAST YEAR'S
REFERENDUM CAST BALLOTS TO LEAVE
THE E.U., A MAJORITY IN NORTHERN
IRELAND VOTED TO REMAIN.
THAT'S LARGELY BECAUSE OF FEARS
BREXIT COULD DESTABILIZE THE TWO
DECADES OF PEACE BETWEEN THE
CATHOLIC AND PROTESTANT
COMMUNITIES.
FOR TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT PATRICIA SABGA
WENT TO NORTHERN IRELAND TO FIND
OUT WHAT'S AT STAKE.
>> Reporter: THE SECTARIAN
VIOLENCE THAT ROILED NORTHERN
IRELAND FOR DECADES IS STAMPED
ON THE BELFAST LANDSCAPE.
ACROSS THIS CAPITAL CITY, MURALS
COMMEMORATE THE MORE THAN 3,500
PEOPLE KILLED DURING THE
CONFLICT, KNOWN HERE AS THE
TROUBLES.
>> WE'RE GOING TO START ON THE
SHANKILL ROAD.
>> Reporter: PETER HUGHES IS OUR
GUIDE.
>> THERE'S A PROCESS OF SOME OF
THE MORE OFFENSIVE MURALS,
STRIPPING THEM AWAY, REPLACE
THEM WITH SOMETHING A LITTLE
MORE POSITIVE, BUT LEAVING
EVIDENCE THERE OF THE OLD.
>> Reporter: IT'S A VISUAL
TEMPERING OF PASSIONS
SURROUNDING THE CONFLICT THAT
PITTED MINORITY CATHOLIC
POLITICAL AND PARAMILITARY
FACTIONS FIGHTING TO REUNITE
NORTHERN IRELAND WITH THE
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND, AGAINST
PROTESTANT STATE AND
PARAMILITARY FORCES WHO WANT
NORTHERN IRELAND TO REMAIN
BRITISH.
>>INSIDE, LEADERS OF EIGHT
POLITICAL GROUPS...
>> Reporter: IN THE MID-1990s,
PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON APPOINTED
FORMER U.S. SENATOR GEORGE
MITCHELL TO BROKER PEACE TALKS,
WHICH CULMINATED IN THE 1998
GOOD FRIDAY AGREEMENT THAT
FORMALLY ENDED THE TROUBLES AND
SET UP A POWER-SHARING
GOVERNMENT BETWEEN PROTESTANT
UNIONISTS AND CATHOLIC
NATIONALISTS.
TODAY, 21 MILES OF "PEACE WALLS"
STILL SEPARATE CATHOLIC AND
PROTESTANT COMMUNITIES IN
BELFAST, A LINGERING DIVISION
REFLECTED IN NORTHERN IRELAND'S
BREXIT VOTE.
WHILE THE UNITED KINGDOM AS A
WHOLE VOTED TO LEAVE THE
EUROPEAN UNION, 56% OF NORTHERN
IRISH VOTERS WANTED TO REMAIN.
THE VOTE ALSO SPLIT ALONG
SECTARIAN LINES, WITH 85% OF
NORTHERN IRISH CATHOLICS
PREFERRING TO STAY IN THE E.U.,
COMPARED TO 40% OF PROTESTANTS.
PERHAPS THE MOST CONTENTIOUS
ISSUE RAISED BY BREXIT IS THE
FUTURE OF THE 300-MILE BORDER
DIVIDING NORTHERN IRELAND FROM
THE REPUBLIC OF IRELAND.
DURING THE TROUBLES, PARTS OF IT
WERE HEAVILY FORTIFIED WITH
MILITARY FEATURES THAT STOOD AS
PHYSICAL REMINDERS OF IRELAND'S
PARTITION BY THE BRITISH.
THE 1998 GOOD FRIDAY AGREEMENT
TRANSFORMED THE BORDER BETWEEN
NORTHERN IRELAND AND THE
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND.
EYESORES OF DIVISION LIKE
MILITARY CHECKPOINTS AND
CONCRETE BOLLARDS AND
WATCHTOWERS HAVE VANISHED.
I'M STANDING ON THE BORDER RIGHT
NOW, BUT IT'S DIFFICULT TO TELL
WHERE ONE COUNTRY ENDS AND THE
OTHER BEGINS.
BUT THAT SEAMLESSNESS COULD VERY
WELL CHANGE WHEN BRITAIN LEAVES
THE EUROPEAN UNION, TAKING
NORTHERN IRELAND WITH IT.
>> NOBODY WANTS TO RETURN TO THE
BORDERS OF THE PAST.
>> Reporter: BRITISH PRIME
MINISTER THERESA MAY HAS TRIED
TO ASSUAGE CONCERNS BY STATING
HER PREFERENCE FOR A
"FRICTIONLESS BORDER."
BUT GERRY ADAMS, A TOWERING
FIGURE AMONG CATHOLIC
REPUBLICANS AND A KEY PLAYER IN
THE PEACE PROCESS, ISN'T BUYING
IT.
>> THE EUROPEAN UNION, QUITE
RIGHTLY, LIKE ANY OTHER
FEDERATION OR ANY OTHER STATE,
WILL WANT TO PROTECT ITSELF.
AND THERE WILL BE TARIFFS, THERE
WILL BE ECONOMIC PENALTIES, AND
THERE WILL BE PHYSICAL
MANIFESTATIONS OF A HARD BORDER.
SOME OF US WERE HERE.
>> Reporter: FOR 34 YEARS, ADAMS
HAS LED SINN FEIN, THE POLITICAL
PARTY HISTORICALLY TIED TO THE
IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY, WHICH
FOUGHT TO SEPARATE NORTHERN
IRELAND FROM THE UNITED KINGDOM
AND A BRITISH GOVERNMENT ADAMS
CONTENDS STILL DOESN'T HAVE
NORTHERN IRELAND'S BEST
INTERESTS AT HEART.
HOW WOULD YOU CHARACTERIZE THEIR
CONCERN FOR NORTHERN IRELAND IN
A POST-BREXIT WORLD?
>> I DON'T THINK THEY GIVE A FIG
ABOUT PEOPLE HERE.
I DON'T THINK THEY EVER HAVE.
>> Reporter: SINN FEIN IS
CALLING FOR A REFERENDUM ON
REUNITING IRELAND, BUT THE
IMMEDIATE DEMAND IS FOR THE
BRITISH GOVERNMENT TO SUPPORT
GRANTING NORTHERN IRELAND A
SPECIAL STATUS TO STAY IN THE
E.U.
THAT WOULD, IN EFFECT, MOVE THE
POST-BREXIT E.U. BORDER FROM
IRELAND TO THE REST OF THE U.K.
>> THIS IS THE MOST SUCCESSFUL
PEACE PROCESS THERE IS IN THE
LAST HALF-CENTURY.
BUT IT NEEDS TO BE NURTURED.
IT NEEDS TO BE NOURISHED.
SO THE SENSIBLE, DECENT THING
FOR THE BRITISH PRIME MINISTER
TO DO IS TO GO FOR THE PRINCIPLE
OF A SPECIAL DEAL FOR THE NORTH
WITHIN THE EUROPEAN UNION, A
SPECIAL DESIGNATED STATUS.
>> THANK YOU, MR. SPEAKER.
>> Reporter: BUT PRIME MINISTER
MAY'S GOVERNMENT CALLS SPECIAL
STATUS FOR NORTHERN IRELAND THE
"WRONG APPROACH."
NORTHERN IRELAND'S DEMOCRATIC
UNIONIST PARTY AGREES.
SAMMY WILSON IS A MEMBER OF THE
BRITISH PARLIAMENT AND THE
D.U.P.'S CHIEF SPOKESMAN ON
BREXIT.
>> OUR POSITION ON THAT IS QUITE
CLEAR: WE DO NOT WISH TO HAVE
ANY SPECIAL STATUS AT ALL, AND
INDEED BREXIT SHOULD NOT BE
USED AS AN EXCUSE TO WEAKEN THE
UNION.
>> Reporter: WILSON SAYS FEARS
OF A RETURN TO HARDENED BORDERS
AFTER BREXIT ARE OVERBLOWN.
>> GIVEN THE METHODS THAT WE NOW
HAVE OF CHECKING MOVEMENTS OF
NOT JUST PEOPLE BUT ALSO OF
GOODS, IT IS ENTIRELY POSSIBLE
USING MODERN TECHNOLOGY TO HAVE
THESE VIRTUALLY FRICTIONLESS
BORDERS.
THEY'LL NOT BE TOTALLY
FRICTIONLESS.
THERE HAS TO BE SOME CHECKING,
THERE HAS TO BE SOME PAPERWORK.
BUT THAT'S ALL MANAGEABLE.
>> Reporter: WILSON ALSO
DISMISSES THE NOTION THAT BREXIT
COULD UNDERMINE PEACE.
>> I'M FAIRLY SURE THAT AT THE
END OF THIS PROCESS, WE WILL BE
WONDERING, "WHAT WAS ALL THE
FUSS ABOUT?"
>> Reporter: THE BREXIT RIFT
BETWEEN NORTHERN IRELAND'S TWO
LARGEST POLITICAL PARTIES IS
UNFOLDING AT A TIME OF CHANGING
DEMOGRAPHICS AND GROWING
POLITICAL TURBULENCE.
A 2011 CENSUS SHOWED THAT
PROTESTANTS NOW COMPRISE LESS
THAN HALF THE POPULATION IN
NORTHERN IRELAND, 48%, WHILE THE
SHARE OF CATHOLICS HAS RISEN TO
45%.
LAST MONTH, NORTHERN IRELAND'S
POWER-SHARING GOVERNMENT
COLLAPSED OVER THE HANDLING OF A
RENEWABLE ENERGY PROJECT,
TRIGGERING NEW ASSEMBLY
ELECTIONS IN MARCH.
WE SAW SIGNS OF RESURGENT
POLITICAL POLARIZATION.
THIS DISPLAY OF PAST I.R.A.
BOMBINGS ON A WALL IN A UNIONIST
NEIGHBORHOOD DREW A PARALLEL TO
THE 2015 PARIS ATTACKS BY THE
ISLAMIC STATE.
THE CAPTION READS "I.R.A., SINN
FEIN, ISIS, NO DIFFERENCE."
WHEN YOU SEE SOMETHING LIKE
THAT, WHAT DOES THAT TELL YOU
ABOUT THE CURRENT STATE OF
PEACE?
>> THE FIRST THING IT TELLS ME
IS THIS, THAT OF COURSE THERE
HAS ALWAYS BEEN AN AFFILIATION
BETWEEN THE IRISH REPUBLICANS
AND TERRORIST GROUPS, ESPECIALLY
IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
>> Reporter: WELL, DO YOU AGREE
WITH IT?
DO YOU AGREE WITH THAT--
>> I DO.
YES, OF COURSE, I DO.
>> Reporter: --PLACARD SAYING,
EQUATING SINN FEIN WITH ISIS?
>> YES, I DO.
>> Reporter: FOR MANY IN
NORTHERN IRELAND, THE PAIN OF
PAST POLITICAL VIOLENCE BY BOTH
SIDES ENDURES DESPITE NEARLY
20 YEARS OF PEACE.
BELFAST NATIVE RAYMOND McCORD
LOST HIS SON, RAYMOND JR., TO
THE TROUBLES IN 1997.
>> THAT'S THE MAN ACTUALLY
MURDERED RAYMOND.
THAT'S THE MAN WHO GAVE THE
ORDER.
>> Reporter: BUT NO ONE HAS EVER
BEEN CHARGED WITH THE CRIME.
UNABLE TO SECURE JUSTICE, McCORD
NOW CAMPAIGNS FOR VICTIMS'
RIGHTS ON BOTH SIDES OF THE
SECTARIAN DIVIDE, ADVOCACY THAT
PROMPTED HIM TO LAUNCH AN
UNSUCCESSFUL LEGAL CHALLENGE TO
BREXIT OVER CONCERNS THAT HE AND
OTHERS COULD LOSE ACCESS TO THE
EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS.
>> PEOPLE LIKE MYSELF CAN'T GET
JUSTICE HERE.
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S NOT HIS
ONLY WORRY.
McCORD FEARS BREXIT COULD STIR
UP TENSIONS AMONG ILLEGAL
PARAMILITARY GROUPS THAT HAVE
LEVELED THREATS AGAINST HIM.
ACCORDING TO A 2015 BRITISH
GOVERNMENT REPORT, "ALL THE MAIN
PARAMILITARY GROUPS OPERATING
DURING THE PERIOD OF THE
TROUBLES REMAIN IN EXISTENCE."
WHILE SECTARIAN KILLINGS HAVE
STOPPED, THE REPORT SAID
"VIOLENCE AND INTIMIDATION ARE
USED TO EXERCISE CONTROL" AT THE
COMMUNITY LEVEL, INCLUDING
"PARAMILITARY-STYLE ASSAULTS
AND, ON OCCASION, MURDERS."
WHAT WILL BREXIT DO TO THE
PEACE AS IT STANDS RIGHT NOW
IN NORTHERN IRELAND?
>> IT COULD DESTROY IT.
SIMPLE AS THAT.
>> Reporter: PAUL O'NEILL, WHO
LIVES IN A WORKING CLASS
CATHOLIC NEIGHBORHOOD IN
BELFAST, ALSO WORRIES ABOUT THE
CONSEQUENCES OF BREXIT.
>> SOMETHING LIKE 600 PEOPLE
FROM THE AREA WERE IMPRISONED AS
A RESULT OF THE CONFLICT.
>> Reporter: DURING THE
TROUBLES, O'NEILL WAS ACCUSED OF
BEING AN I.R.A. MEMBER AND
JAILED FOR FIVE YEARS, ONLY TO
HAVE HIS CONVICTION OVERTURNED.
SINCE THE GOOD FRIDAY AGREEMENT,
HE'S WORKED WITH FORMER
PRISONERS AS PART OF THE ASHTON
COMMUNITY CENTER, WHICH RECEIVES
FUNDING FROM THE E.U. THAT WILL
DRY UP AFTER BREXIT.
>> THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT
PROMISED THAT THEY WOULD
PROVIDE ASSISTANCE FOR
REPUBLICAN EX-PRISONERS,
LOYALIST EX-PRISONERS, AND THEIR
FAMILIES TO READJUST.
VERY LITTLE HAPPENED, DIDN'T
HAPPEN.
IT WAS EUROPEAN MONEY THAT
ALLOWED THAT TO HAPPEN.
I MEAN, THERE'S A WHOLE RANGE
OF PROJECTS, YOUTH PROJECTS,
EX-PRISONER SUPPORT PROJECTS,
VARIOUS PROJECTS THAT WOULDN'T
AND COULDN'T HAVE HAPPENED WERE
IT NOT FOR THE FACT THAT WE WERE
ABLE TO ACCESS FUNDING FROM
EUROPE.
>> Reporter: THE E.U. ALSO FUNDS
ERASMUS, A STUDENT EXCHANGE
PROGRAM THAT BRINGS TOGETHER
CATHOLIC AND PROTESTANT YOUTH,
SOME FOR THE FIRST TIME.
WHO HERE IS CATHOLIC, AND WHO
HERE IS PROTESTANT?
>> WE'RE CATHOLIC.
>> YEAH, CATHOLIC.
>> Reporter: OKAY?
AND WHO'S PROTESTANT?
AND HOW DO YOU GET ALONG?
>> BRILLIANT!
>> Reporter: ON A WALL IN
BELFAST, A MURAL STANDS AS
TESTAMENT TO CATHOLIC AND
PROTESTANT CHILDREN WHO LIVED
TOGETHER IN HARMONY UNTIL THE
TROUBLES BEGAN.
>> FOR THEM, IT EXPLODED OVER A
TWO-DAY PERIOD.
1,800 FAMILIES LOST THEIR HOMES
IN TWO DAYS.
SO AT THAT POINT, THESE KIDS ARE
SEPARATE, THEY'RE SEGREGATED.
>> Reporter: IS THERE ANY
CONCERN THAT BREXIT COULD
POSSIBLY LEAD BACK TO THAT?
>> THERE'S VERY MUCH A FEAR, AN
UNDERCURRENT WITHIN CERTAIN
PEOPLE, THAT WE COULD BE DRAGGED
BACK TO THOSE DARK DAYS.
PERSONALLY, I DON'T THINK SO,
BUT THERE ARE PEOPLE OF THAT
BELIEF.
>> Sreenivasan: READ MORE ABOUT
THE HISTORY OF THE MURALS IN
NORTHERN IRELAND'S CAPITAL.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE KANSAS CITY
AREA BAR AND RESTAURANT WHERE
TWO INDIAN IMMIGRANTS AND A
THIRD MAN WERE SHOT IN A
POSSIBLE HATE CRIME ON
WEDNESDAY, REOPENED TODAY.
ABOUT 100 PEOPLE HELD A VIGIL
FOR THE VICTIMS OUTSIDE AUSTIN'S
BAR AND GRILL IN OLATHE LAST
NIGHT.
THE MAN ARRESTED FOR THE
SHOOTINGS, 51-YEAR-OLD ADAM
PURINTON, HAS HIS FIRST COURT
APPEARANCE MONDAY ON STATE
MURDER AND ATTEMPTED MURDER
CHARGES.
HE ALLEGEDLY KILLED 32-YEAR-OLD
SRINIVAS KUCHIBHOTLA, A U.S.-
EDUCATED ENGINEER WHO WORKED FOR
THE G.P.S. COMPANY GARMIN IN
KANSAS CITY.
THE INDIAN MAN WHO SURVIVED HIS
WOUNDS SAID TODAY THE SHOOTER
HAD ASKED THEM WHAT KINDS OF
VISAS THEY HAD AND IF THEY WERE
IN THE U.S. LEGALLY.
A WITNESS HAS SAID THE SHOOTER
YELLED "GET OUT OF MY COUNTRY"
BEFORE OPENING FIRE.
U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER
PROTECTION IS GETTING READY TO
SOLICIT DESIGNS FOR PRESIDENT
TRUMP'S PROPOSED BORDER WALL
WITH MEXICO.
C.B.P. SAYS IT WILL POST DESIGN
SPECIFICATIONS IN EARLY MARCH
AND THEN ACCEPT PROPOSALS FOR
TWO WEEKS BEFORE ASKING
CONTRACTORS TO BID ON CHOSEN
PROPOSALS IN APRIL.
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY ESTIMATES A BORDER WALL
WOULD TAKE THREE YEARS TO BUILD
AND COST CLOSE TO $22 BILLION,
SIGNIFICANTLY MORE THAN THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION AND
CONGRESS HAVE PROJECTED.
THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY IS DELAYING
IMPLEMENTATION OF A RULE TO MAKE
MINING COMPANIES SHOW THEY'RE
ABLE TO PAY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.
E.P.A. ADMINISTRATOR SCOTT
PRUITT SAYS HE'S EXTENDING THE
PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD FOUR
MONTHS TO GET MORE INPUT FROM
MINE OWNERS WHO OPPOSE THE
RULE.
ENVIRONMENTALISTS SAY THE RULE
HOLDS COMPANIES ACCOUNTABLE FOR
POLLUTION OF RIVERS AND OTHER
WATERWAYS.
IN THE PAST, SOME COMPANIES
AVOIDED CLEANUP COSTS BY
DECLARING BANKRUPTCY.
THE E.P.A. SPENT $1.1 BILLION ON
MINE CLEANUP BETWEEN 2010 AND
2014.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, THE
TENSION BETWEEN THE PRESIDENT
AND THE PRESS CONTINUES.
WITHOUT GIVING A REASON, MR.
TRUMP ANNOUNCED ON TWITTER TODAY
HE WILL NOT BE ATTENDING THE
WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENTS'
ASSOCIATION DINNER THIS APRIL,
ADDING: "PLEASE WISH EVERYONE
WELL AND HAVE A GREAT EVENING!"
IN RESPONSE, WHITE HOUSE
CORRESPONDENTS ASSOCIATION
PRESIDENT JEFF MASON SAID, IN
PART, THE DINNER "HAS BEEN AND
WILL CONTINUE TO BE A
CELEBRATION OF THE FIRST
AMENDMENT AND THE IMPORTANT ROLE
PLAYED BY AN INDEPENDENT NEWS
MEDIA IN A HEALTHY REPUBLIC."
BLOOMBERG, "VANITY FAIR" AND THE
"NEW YORKER" HAVE PULLED OUT OF
THE DINNER AND THEIR ANNUAL
AFTER PARTIES, CITING THE
PRESIDENT'S TREATMENT OF THE
PRESS.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.